[Docs] Audio Cog Guide (#5871)
Cog-Creators/Red-DiscordBot: docs/cog_guides/audio.rst

.. note::

	The following services are currently supported through ``[p]play``:

	* Bandcamp
	* HTTPS Icecast Streams
	* HTTPS Shoutcast Streams
	* Local file playback (:ref:`see here<local-tracks>`)
	* SoundCloud
	* Spotify links via YouTube (:ref:`see here<spotify-playback-and-api-keys>`)
	* Twitch
	* Vimeo
	* YouTube
	* Other AAC, MP3, or OGG-encoded streams

.. note::

	``[p]audioset restrict`` is a toggle that only allows commercial site (YouTube, Soundcloud, etc) playback by default.
	When toggled off, users will be able to play songs from HTTPS streams or arbitrary sites, but this could be a
	security issue as your bot's IP address will be sent to any site it's connecting to, per standard internet protocol.

.. _faq:

--------------------------
Frequently Asked Questions
--------------------------

Q: I used a playlist link with some of the playlist related commands and it tells me that it can't find it. 
How can I use this playlist link with playlist commands in audio?

	Red Audio uses Red playlists in its commands that take playlist arguments. 
	These playlists can be created and modified using the ``[p]playlist`` group command.

> 	When a playlist or song(s) are saved as a Red playlist, it is assinged an ID automatically,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	When a playlist or song(s) are saved as a Red playlist, it is assigned an ID automatically,
```

	and it is also assigned the one-word name you provided it when creating the playlist.
	Either one of these identifiers can be used with playlist-related commands.

Q: How do I turn off autoplay?

	Use the ``[p]audioset autoplay toggle`` command.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Q: How do I get the bot to disconnect from the channel when it's done playing?

	``[p]audioset dc`` will make the bot auto-disconnect when playback completes and the 
	queue is empty. 
	``[p]audioset emptydisconnect`` with a seconds argument greater than 0 will make the bot 
	auto-disconnect once it's alone in the channel, after the amount of seconds given to the 
	command. This setting takes precedence over ``[p]audioset dc`` if both settings are active.

```

I think this might be phrased a little awkwardly but I wanted to get this point added as well. Also not quite sure if I formatted this addition correctly so please check this before committing this suggestion, if you agree.

Author: I'm in agreement of this re-phrasing, thanks for adding that

Q: How do I use localtracks?

	See the :ref:`local tracks section<local-tracks>`.
    
Q: My console is saying that "Port 2333 is already in use". How can I fix this?

    If you are trying to run multiple bots with Audio, you should follow our guide on
    :ref:`setting up Audio for multiple bots<multibots>`. Otherwise, another external process
    is using the port, so you need to figure out what is using port 2333 and terminate/disconnect it yourself.
    
Q: My terminal is saying that I "must install Java 11 for Lavalink to run". How can I fix this?

    You are getting this error because you have a different version of Java installed, or you don't have
    Java installed at all. As the error states, Java 11 is required, and can be installed from

>     `here <https://adoptium.net/temurin/releases/?version=11>`_.

Reviewer: Perhaps it may be good to refer them back to the docs, since they should have installed Java 11 with the Red install process, but this may work too as we only recommend that one specific Java vendor and version at this point.

.. _guild-audioset-commands:

-----------------------------
Guild-based Audioset Commands
-----------------------------

* ``[p]audioset notify`` - Toggle extra messages, like a notification message when a track starts, showing the song title, artist, etc.
* ``[p]audioset maxvolume`` - Set the max volume for the guild.
* ``[p]audioset autodeafen`` - Toggle the bot being auto-deafened upon voice channel join.
* ``[p]audioset restrictions`` - Manage the keyword blocklist/allowlist for the guild.
* ``[p]audioset lyrics`` - Searching for tracks will prefer songs with 'lyrics' in the name, to avoid videos with long story intros or outros.

.. _spotify-playback-and-api-keys:

------------------------------
Spotify Playback and API Keys
------------------------------

Audio can play single tracks or playlists from Spotify by looking up the song(s) on YouTube and playing those tracks instead.
We will never be able to play directly from Spotify itself as it is against their Terms of Service. This is possible by
providing your bot with a YouTube API key and a Spotify API key. Instructions for setting both can be found under

> ``[p]audioset youtubeapi`` and ``[p]audioset spotifyapi``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will never be able to play directly from Spotify itself as it is against their Terms of Service. Audio can play 
single tracks or playlists from Spotify by looking up the song(s) on YouTube and playing those tracks instead.
This is possible by providing your bot with a YouTube API key and a Spotify API key. Instructions for setting both 
can be found under ``[p]audioset youtubeapi`` and ``[p]audioset spotifyapi``.
```

from the local cache, and use the API credits to look up the next 100 songs. After 5 days of playing the Spotify playlist
through Audio, that playlist will be fully cached locally and will not require any API credits to play songs.

The following commands are relevant:

* ``[p]genre`` - Lets users pick a Spotify music genre to queue music from.
* ``[p]audioset countrycode`` - Lets guild owners specify what country code to prefer for Spotify searches, for the guild.
* ``[p]audioset mycountrycode`` - Lets individual users pick what country code to prefer for Spotify searches of their own.

.. _local-tracks:

------------
Local Tracks
------------

Audio can play music from a ``localtracks`` folder on the device where the bot is hosted. This feature is only available
if your bot and your Lavalink.jar are on the same host, which is the default setup.

To use this feature:

1. Create a "localtracks" folder anywhere where Lavalink/your bot user has permissions to access, on the system.
2. Use ``[p]audioset localpath <localtracks path>`` command to set the folder created above as local tracks folder.

> 3. Create/move/copy/symblink your album folders (Subfolders containing your tracks) to the folder created in Step 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Create/move/copy/symlink your album folders (Subfolders containing your tracks) to the folder created in Step 1.
```

   * ``localtracks/<parent folder>/<child folder>/song.mp3``

When using this localtracks feature, use ``[p]local`` commands. Use ``[p]play <parent folder>/song.mp3`` to play
single songs. Use ``[p]local folder <parent folder>/<child folder>`` to play the entire folder.

The following formats are supported:

* MP3
* FLAC
* WAV
* Matroska/WebM (AAC, Opus or Vorbis codecs)
* MP4/M4A (AAC codec)
* OGG streams (Opus, Vorbis and FLAC codecs)
* AAC streams

The following files are partially supported:

* .ra
* .wav
* .opus
* .wma
* .ts
* .au
* .mov
* .flv
* .mkv
* .wmv
* .3gp
* .m4v
* .mk3d
* .mka
* .mks

The following files are **NOT** supported:

* .mid
* .mka
* .amr
* .aiff
* .ac3
* .voc
* .dsf
* .vob
* .mts
* .avi
* .mpg
* .mpeg
* .swf

.. _dj-role-and-voteskip:

--------------------
DJ Role and Voteskip
--------------------

Audio has an internal permissions system for restrictions to audio commands while other people are listening to
music with the bot. Bot owners, server admins and mods bypass these restrictions when they are in use.

``[p]audioset dj`` will turn on the DJ role restriction system, ``[p]audioset role`` will let you choose or

> reassign the DJ role, and if you wish to make non-privledged users vote to skip songs, voteskip can be enabled

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reassign the DJ role, and if you wish to make non-privileged users vote to skip songs, voteskip can be enabled
```

with ``[p]audioset vote``.

> If a non-prilvedged user is listening to music alone in the channel, they can use commands without restrictions,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a non-privileged user is listening to music alone in the channel, they can use commands without restrictions,
```

* Try the web browser instead of the desktop client for listening.
* Simply wait, as audio quality may improve in due course.
* Restart your bot.
* Check to make sure it's not just a bad quality song (try a different song).
* Try to listen on a different Discord server or server region.
* If not everyone is experiencing the issue, it's a discord client issue.

.. _no-sound:

^^^^^^^^
No Sound
^^^^^^^^

If the bot's speaking light is active, but there is no sound, troubleshoot the following:

1. Is the bot's user volume turned up? (right click on the bot in discord, see the slider).
2. Is the bot muted or deafened? Are you deafened? Are you deaf?
3. Check Discord audio device settings and volume (cog icon next to your username in the bottom left, click "Voice and Video").
4. Try dragging and dropping the bot back to the voice channel.
5. Check system audio device settings and volume.
6. Ask another member to come into the voice channel to confirm that it's not just you.

If the track progress is stuck on 00:00 when you run ``[p]now``:

1. Try to run ``[p]disconnect`` and replay the song.
2. Try to reload the audio cog with ``[p]audioset restart``.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Make sure the firewall on the host is configured properly.

```

-------------------------
Lavalink - Advanced Usage
-------------------------

.. _multibots:

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Setting up Multiple Red Instances with Audio
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you are wanting to use multiple bots with Audio on the same machine, you'll need to make a few
necessary modifications.

Firstly, stop all Red bots. For each bot using Audio:

1. Start the bot.
2. Run the command ``[p]llset external``.
3. Stop the bot.

Next, open a command prompt/terminal window. Navigate to ``<datapath>/cogs/Audio`` for any of your bot
instances - it doesn't matter which bot as all your bots will now use this single instance of Lavalink.
You can find your ``<datapath>`` with the ``[p]datapath`` command.

Now you need to smartly determine your RAM needs. If your bot has 1GB RAM available, Lavalink should be
restricted to perhaps 384MB -> 768MB, depending on the cogs you have installed. If your bot has 2GB of
RAM available, a good amount may be 512MB -> 1GB. 

Run the following command, where ``Xms`` specifies the initial memory allocation pool and ``Xmx`` is the

> maximum memory allocation pool. Use the RAM values you have just determinined. The MB suffix is M and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
maximum memory allocation pool. Use the RAM values you have just determined. The MB suffix is M and
```

We will now register Lavalink as a system service, allowing it to run in the background without user intervention.
But before that, we need to gather some information. While in the lavalink folder, run the following commands one by one
and note their output somewhere, because we will need them:

.. code-block:: sh

    pwd
    which java
    echo "$USER"

Now run the following command:

.. code-block:: sh

    sudo -e /etc/systemd/system/lavalink.service

On new systems it may ask for a choice of editor. Nano is the best choice. To select it, press 1 and hit enter.
The nano text editor will now open. Now copy and paste the following text into it:

.. code-block:: ini

    [Unit]
    Description=lavalink
    After=multi-user.target

    [Service]
    ExecStart=< Java executable path > -Djdk.tls.client.protocols=TLSv1.2 -jar < Lavalink path >/Lavalink.jar
    WorkingDirectory=< Lavalink path >
    User=< username >
    Group=< username >
    ExecStartPre=/bin/bash < Lavalink path >/auto_update.sh # Comment this line out if you did not create the auto_update.sh
    Type=idle
    Restart=always
    RestartSec=15

    [Install]
    WantedBy=multi-user.target

> * Replace all occurances of ``< Lavalink path >`` with the output of ``pwd`` you noted earlier.
> * Replace all occurances of ``< Java executable path >`` with the output of ``which java`` you noted earlier.
> * Replace all occurances of ``< username >`` with the output of echo ``"$USER"`` you noted earlier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Replace all occurrences of ``< Lavalink path >`` with the output of ``pwd`` you noted earlier.
* Replace all occurrences of ``< Java executable path >`` with the output of ``which java`` you noted earlier.
* Replace all occurrences of ``< username >`` with the output of echo ``"$USER"`` you noted earlier.
```

    .. code-block:: sh

        sudo systemctl stop lavalink

    You can also check the logs Lavalink persists by checking the ``spring.log`` file in the ``lavalink/logs/`` folder.

Congratulations, you are almost ready.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Connecting to Your New Lavalink Server
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If your Red instance and Lavalink server will communicate over the Internet, make sure the Lavalink port is accessible
from the internet. Click `here <https://www.yougetsignal.com/tools/open-ports/>`__ and test if the port you set in the ``application.yml``
is accessible on the public ip address of your Lavalink server. This step isn't necessary if your Lavalink server and Red
instance will communicate over LAN. If you get connectivity errors, make sure there are no firewalls blocking the port and
you are using the correct port.

If successful, run each of the following commands one by one on your bot. Replace ``"yourlavalinkip"`` with the ip of your Lavalink server.
Change ``"port"`` with the port you set up in the application.yml. Change ``"password"`` with the password you set up in the application.yml.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Do not use quotes in these commands. For example, ``[p]llset host 192.168.10.101`` or ``[p]llset password ahyesverysecure``.

```

.. code-block:: none

    [p]llset external
    [p]llset host "yourlavalinkip"

>     [p]llset wsport "port"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    [p]llset port "port"
```

.. _audio:

=====
Audio
=====

This is the cog guide for the audio cog. You will
find detailed docs about usage and commands.

``[p]`` is considered as your prefix.

> .. note:: To use this cog, load it by typing this::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. note:: To use this cog, load it by typing this:
```

    	[p]load audio

You can see additional help for any command in this guide by using ``[p]help`` with the
command name, like ``[p]help playlist append``.

> In this guide, you will see references to "Lavalink" or the "Lavalink.jar". Lavalink is the

Reviewer 2: Should reference (hyperlink) the project on first mention

> In this guide, you will see references to "Lavalink" or the "Lavalink.jar". Lavalink is the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this guide, you will see references to "Lavalink" or the "Lavalink.jar". `Lavalink <https://github.com/freyacodes/Lavalink/>`_ is the
```

Java-based audio backend we use to be able to play music through the bot. Most users will
not have to worry much about Lavalink or what it is, as Audio manages this process for you

> by default. Advanced users can read more about Lavalink and special cases under the Lavalink - Advanced Usage section below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by default. Advanced users can read more about Lavalink and special cases under the 
:ref:`Lavalink - Advanced Usage<advanced-usage>` section below.
```

Kreusada, please double check that this link assignment works, and see my comment below referring to it

> You will also see references to ``internal`` or ``external`` in regards to the Lavalink.jar.

Reviewer 2: You shouldn't not be using internal and external.

the correct reference terms are managed and unmanaged node I'm 99% sure the pr making that change had been merged into develop

The default is ``internal``, as Audio manages the Lavalink.jar in this state. If it is run as an

> ``external`` process, this means you as the bot owner will be managing the Lavalink process yourself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will also see references to ``managed`` or ``unmanaged`` in regards to the Lavalink.jar.
The default is ``managed``, as Audio manages the Lavalink.jar in this state. If it is run as an
``unmanaged`` process, this means you as the bot owner will be managing the Lavalink process yourself.
```

	When a playlist or song(s) are saved as a Red playlist, it is assigned an ID automatically,
	and it is also assigned the one-word name you provided it when creating the playlist.
	Either one of these identifiers can be used with playlist-related commands.

Q: How do I turn off autoplay?

	Use the ``[p]audioset autoplay toggle`` command.

Q: How do I get the bot to disconnect from the channel when it's done playing?

	``[p]audioset dc`` will make the bot auto-disconnect when playback completes and the 
	queue is empty. 
	``[p]audioset emptydisconnect`` with a seconds argument greater than 0 will make the bot 
	auto-disconnect once it's alone in the channel, after the amount of seconds given to the 
	command. This setting takes precedence over ``[p]audioset dc`` if both settings are active.

Q: How do I use localtracks?

	See the :ref:`local tracks section<local-tracks>`.
    
Q: My console is saying that "Port 2333 is already in use". How can I fix this?

    If you are trying to run multiple bots with Audio, you should follow our guide on
    :ref:`setting up Audio for multiple bots<multibots>`. Otherwise, another external process

>     is using the port, so you need to figure out what is using port 2333 and terminate/disconnect it yourself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    :ref:`setting up Audio for multiple bots<multibots>`. Otherwise, another process is using the 
    port, so you need to figure out what is using port 2333 and terminate/disconnect it yourself.
```

    
Q: My terminal is saying that I "must install Java 11 for Lavalink to run". How can I fix this?

    You are getting this error because you have a different version of Java installed, or you don't have
    Java installed at all. As the error states, Java 11 is required, and can be installed from
    `here <https://adoptium.net/temurin/releases/?version=11>`_.
    
    Use ``[p]llset java <path_to_java_11_executable>``, to make Audio launch Lavalink with a
    specific Java binary. To do this, you will need to locate your ``java.exe``/``java`` file
    in your **Java 11 install**.
    
    Alternatively, update your PATH settings so that Java 11 is the one used by ``java``. However,
    you should confirm that nothing other than Red is running on the machine that requires Java.

.. _queue_commands:

----------------------
Queue Related Commands
----------------------

* ``[p]queue`` - Shows the queue of playing songs and current settings for the server for shuffle and repeat.
* ``[p]remove`` - Remove a song from the queue. This command uses the track position in the queue for identification, e.g. ``[p]remove 10`` will remove
  the 10th song in the queue.

> * ``[p]shuffle`` - Toggle random song playback from the queue, and shuffles the queue.

Reviewer 2: [p]shuffle shouldn't shuffle the queue since it's just a toggle, [p]queue shuffle is the on demand shuffle

> * ``[p]shuffle`` - Toggle random song playback from the queue, and shuffles the queue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``[p]shuffle`` - Toggle random song playback from the queue.
* ``[p]queue shuffle`` - Shuffles the queue.
```

.. _spotify-playback-and-api-keys:

------------------------------
Spotify Playback and API Keys
------------------------------

We will never be able to play directly from Spotify itself as it is against their Terms of Service. Audio can play 
single tracks or playlists from Spotify by looking up the song(s) on YouTube and playing those tracks instead.
This is possible by providing your bot with a YouTube API key and a Spotify API key. Instructions for setting both 
can be found under ``[p]audioset youtubeapi`` and ``[p]audioset spotifyapi``.

The YouTube API keys that are being given out these days only have 10000 units of quota per day, which is equivalent to
100 Spotify song lookups. There is a local metadata cache that Audio uses to be able to retain information about song
lookups, though. For example, with a 500 song Spotify playlist, the bot will be able to fetch the first 100 songs the
first day the Spotify playlist URL is used with Audio, then the next day it will be able to use the first 100 lookups
from the local cache, and use the API credits to look up the next 100 songs. After 5 days of playing the Spotify playlist

> through Audio, that playlist will be fully cached locally and will not require any API credits to play songs.

Reviewer 2: Until the cache expiration timedelta has elapsed

> through Audio, that playlist will be fully cached locally and will not require any API credits to play songs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
through Audio, that playlist will be fully cached locally until the cached entries are set to expire and will not require  
any API credits to play songs.
```

* OGG streams (Opus, Vorbis and FLAC codecs)
* AAC streams

The following files are partially supported:

* .ra
* .wav
* .opus
* .wma
* .ts
* .au
* .mov
* .flv
* .mkv
* .wmv
* .3gp
* .m4v
* .mk3d
* .mka
* .mks

The following files are **NOT** supported:

* .mid
* .mka
* .amr
* .aiff
* .ac3
* .voc
* .dsf
* .vob
* .mts
* .avi
* .mpg
* .mpeg
* .swf

.. _dj-role-and-voteskip:

--------------------
DJ Role and Voteskip
--------------------

Audio has an internal permissions system for restrictions to audio commands while other people are listening to
music with the bot. Bot owners, server admins and mods bypass these restrictions when they are in use.

``[p]audioset dj`` will turn on the DJ role restriction system, ``[p]audioset role`` will let you choose or
reassign the DJ role, and if you wish to make non-privileged users vote to skip songs, voteskip can be enabled
with ``[p]audioset vote``.

If a non-privileged user is listening to music alone in the channel, they can use commands without restrictions,
even if DJ role or voteskip settings are active.

.. _sound-quality-issues:

--------------------
Sound Quality Issues
--------------------

Laggy audio is most likely caused by:

> * A problem with the connection between the host machine of your bot to the Discord server.

Reviewer 2: The machine hosting lavalink - as users can use unmanaged nodes on remote machines

> * A problem with the connection between the host machine of your bot to the Discord server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A problem with the connection between the machine that is hosting Lavalink and the Discord voice server.
```

* Issues with Discord.

You can try the following to resolve poor sound quality:

* Don't host on home internet, especially over a WiFi connection, try hosting your bot elsewhere.
* Try the web browser instead of the desktop client for listening.
* Simply wait, as audio quality may improve in due course.
* Restart your bot.
* Check to make sure it's not just a bad quality song (try a different song).
* Try to listen on a different Discord server or server region.

> * If not everyone is experiencing the issue, it's a discord client issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If not everyone is experiencing the issue, it's a Discord client issue.
```

.. _no-sound:

^^^^^^^^
No Sound
^^^^^^^^

If the bot's speaking light is active, but there is no sound, troubleshoot the following:

1. Is the bot's user volume turned up? (right click on the bot in discord, see the slider).
2. Is the bot muted or deafened? Are you deafened? Are you deaf?
3. Check Discord audio device settings and volume (cog icon next to your username in the bottom left, click "Voice and Video").
4. Try dragging and dropping the bot back to the voice channel.
5. Check system audio device settings and volume.
6. Ask another member to come into the voice channel to confirm that it's not just you.

If the track progress is stuck on 00:00 when you run ``[p]now``:

1. Try to run ``[p]disconnect`` and replay the song.
2. Try to reload the audio cog with ``[p]audioset restart``.
3. Make sure the firewall on the host is configured properly.

> -------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion

.. _advanced_usage:

-------------------------
```

Kreusada, I'm not sure if wrote this correctly or if a jump marker can be assigned here, based on rst standards, so please check that this works

Lavalink - Advanced Usage
-------------------------

.. _multibots:

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Setting up Multiple Red Instances with Audio
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you are wanting to use multiple bots with Audio on the same machine, you'll need to make a few
necessary modifications.

Firstly, stop all Red bots. For each bot using Audio:

1. Start the bot.
2. Run the command ``[p]llset external``.
3. Stop the bot.

Next, open a command prompt/terminal window. Navigate to ``<datapath>/cogs/Audio`` for any of your bot
instances - it doesn't matter which bot as all your bots will now use this single instance of Lavalink.
You can find your ``<datapath>`` with the ``[p]datapath`` command.

Now you need to smartly determine your RAM needs. If your bot has 1GB RAM available, Lavalink should be
restricted to perhaps 384MB -> 768MB, depending on the cogs you have installed. If your bot has 2GB of
RAM available, a good amount may be 512MB -> 1GB. 

> Run the following command, where ``Xms`` specifies the initial memory allocation pool and ``Xmx`` is the

Reviewer 2: There is no reason to mention Xms it was intentioned removed from the cc because it has no real benefit being there and only server to make the flags more complex

maximum memory allocation pool. Use the RAM values you have just determined. The MB suffix is M and
the GB suffix is G.

.. code-block:: ini

> 	java -jar -Xms512M -Xmx768M Lavalink.jar -Djdk.tls.client.protocols=TLSv1.2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you need to determine your RAM needs. If your bot has 1GB RAM available, Lavalink should be restricted 
to perhaps 384MB -> 768MB, depending on the cogs you have installed. If your bot has 2GB of RAM available, 
a good amount may be 512MB -> 1GB. 

Run the following command, where ``Xmx`` specifies the RAM values you have just determined. The MB suffix 
is M and the GB suffix is G.

.. code-block:: ini

	java -jar -Xmx768M Lavalink.jar -Djdk.tls.client.protocols=TLSv1.2
```

Leave this command prompt/terminal window open (you will need to do this every time you want to start Lavalink
for your bots). Once Lavalink says it has fully started, you can start your bots back up.

.. note::

> 	If you are on Linux, this process can be automated using systemd, for externally-run

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	If you are on Linux, this process can be automated using systemd, for unmanaged
```

	Lavalink backends **only**. See :ref:`here<linux-audio-autorestart>` for details.

.. warning::

	By running multiple bots on Audio, the responsibility for keeping the Lavalink.jar updated will now be
	in your hands, as Red will no longer manage it through the Audio cog. See :ref:`here<obtaining-the-latest-lavalink>` for guidance.

.. _linux-audio-autorestart:

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Linux Lavalink Auto-Restart
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Auto-restarting Lavalink is possible on Linux with systemd, for externally-run Lavalink backends.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Auto-restarting Lavalink is possible on Linux with systemd, for unmanaged Lavalink backends.
```

	[Service]
	ExecStart=<Java executable path> -Djdk.tls.client.protocols=TLSv1.2 -jar < Lavalink path >/Lavalink.jar
	WorkingDirectory=<Lavalink path>
	User=<username>
	Group=<username>
	ExecStartPre=/bin/bash <Lavalink path>/auto_update.sh # Comment this line out if you did not create the auto_update.sh
	Type=idle
	Restart=always
	RestartSec=15

	[Install]
	WantedBy=multi-user.target

Finally, we need to start and enable the service. Run the following commands, separately.

.. code-block:: sh
	
	sudo systemctl start lavalink
	sudo systemctl enable lavalink

These commands always need to be ran when starting the lavalink service to ensure that the
service runs in the background.

Finally, you can run the following to retrieve logs for the service, when you need them:

.. code-block:: sh
	
	sudo journalctl -u lavalink

.. _obtaining-the-latest-lavalink:

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Obtaining the latest Lavalink.jar on a Red update
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**To manually download the jar**

1. Stop your bot.
2. Click `here <https://github.com/Cog-Creators/Lavalink-Jars/releases/latest>`__.
3. Download the Lavalink.jar file.

> **If you are not running an external instance of Lavalink**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**If you are not running your own instance of Lavalink**
```

1. Stop your bot by running ``[p]shutdown``.
2. Move the Lavalink.jar to your ``<datapath>/cogs/Audio/`` folder.
3. Start your bot.

> **If you are running an external instance of Lavalink**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**If you are running your own instance of Lavalink**
```

1. Stop all instances of Red running on the host.
2. Stop the Lavalink process.
3. Move the Lavalink.jar to where your old Lavalink.jar is located and overwrite the old file.
4. Start up the new Lavalink.jar process via a process manager like systemd, or by running:

   .. code-block:: sh
   
	   java -jar Lavalink.jar -Djdk.tls.client.protocols=TLSv1.2

5. Start up your bots

.. _remote-lavalink:

---------------------------------------------

> Setting up Lavalink on a remote VPS or server

Reviewer 2: Remote unmanaged Lavalink node

> ---------------------------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
--------------------------------------------------------------
Setting up a unmanaged Lavalink node on a remote VPS or server
--------------------------------------------------------------
```

.. attention::

    Changes have been made to this guide since, but it is with thanks
    to BreezeQS who originally wrote the bare-bones of this guide on a
    separate gist.

> This guide explains how to set up an external Lavalink node on a separate server running Ubuntu 20.04 LTS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide explains how to set up an unmanaged Lavalink node on a separate server running Ubuntu 20.04 LTS.
```

It is assumed your bot currently uses an internally managed Lavalink server (Red's default). If you run

> into any issues, feel free to ask for help in the `Red Support Server <https://discord.gg/red>`__.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is assumed your bot currently uses a managed Lavalink server (Red's default). If you run into any
issues, feel free to ask for help in the `Red Support Server <https://discord.gg/red>`__.
```

.. warning::

    For security purposes DO NOT follow this guide while logged in as the root user. You should create
    a separate non-root user instead. You can follow
    `this guide <https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-create-a-new-sudo-enabled-user-on-ubuntu-20-04-quickstart>`__
    from DigitalOcean if you need help about how this is done.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Prerequisite Installation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We will first install Lavalink and lay the foundation for our finished server. There are some prequisites
that must be installed on the server you aim to use for running Lavalink. To set those up, run each of the
following commands one by one.

.. code-block:: sh

    sudo apt update
    sudo apt upgrade -y

>     sudo apt install openjdk-11-jre-headless curl nano -y

Reviewer 2: Zulu  13 is better for a remote setup, the only reason it is not used for ted is because it would require users to run through the install commands again to be able to use it which is a rather i covinient setup

>     sudo apt install openjdk-11-jre-headless curl nano -y

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    sudo apt install curl nano -y

If you have no preference in which Java version you install on your target system, Red 
uses OpenJDK 11 in the managed Lavalink configuration. It can be installed by running:

.. code-block:: sh

    sudo apt install openjdk-11-jre-headless -y

Otherwise, Lavalink works well with most versions of Java 11, 13, 15, 16, 17, and 18. Azul 
Zulu builds are suggested, see `here <https://github.com/freyacodes/Lavalink/#requirements>`_ for more information.
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Setting Up The Lavalink Folder
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Lavalink itself, its configuration, and its logs will all be kept in a single directory. In this guide,
we will simply call this directory lavalink and it will be located in the home directory of the user you
are logged in as.

We need to create a new directory called **lavalink**, and then switch to it as the upcoming sections of
this guide require your current directory to be the **lavalink** folder. We can achieve this by running
the following commands one by one:

.. code-block:: sh

    cd
    mkdir lavalink
    cd lavalink

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Installing Lavalink
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Lavalink executable used in Red-Discordbot is slightly modified and is not the same as stock Lavalink,
it ensures proper operation when used with Red-Discordbot and compatibility with systems and libraries that

> Red uses to operate. It's required to use this Lavalink jar when running external Lavalink servers to not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Red uses to operate. It's required to use this Lavalink jar when running unmanaged Lavalink servers to not
```

that you are inside the lavalink folder, of course:

.. code-block:: sh
    
    java -Djdk.tls.client.protocols=TLSv1.2 -jar Lavalink.jar

On successful start, Lavalink will greet you with a line mentioning that it is ready to accept connections and you can now
try connecting to it with your bot. 

Since we did not configure autostart for Lavalink, you will have to keep the console window open or it will be shut down
and all connections will be dropped. This is similar to how it happens in Red-Discordbot itself.

This also means that you will have to restart Lavalink manually each time you log on. This is often done in testing environments.
You can restart Lavalink manually by running the following commands one by one:

.. code-block:: sh

    cd
    cd lavalink
    java -Djdk.tls.client.protocols=TLSv1.2 -jar Lavalink.jar

You can stop Lavalink and reclaim the console by hitting ``CTRL+C``.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Updating Lavalink
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

With new releases of Red-Discordbot, sometimes new Lavalink jars are also released. Using a obselete version of Lavalink
with newer versions of Red-Discordbot can cause all sorts of problems.

> Normally, users do not have to worry about this as when Red-Discordbot is configured to use a internal Lavalink server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Normally, users do not have to worry about this as when Red-Discordbot is configured to use a managed Lavalink server
```

(the default setting) Lavalink is automatically updated when a new release comes out.

> However, since you are running a external Lavalink instance yourself you are responsible for keeping it up to date.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, since you are running a Lavalink instance yourself you are responsible for keeping it up to date.
```

    [p]shuffle 

**Description**

Toggle shuffle.

.. _audio-command-shuffle-bumped:

""""""""""""""
shuffle bumped
""""""""""""""

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]shuffle bumped 

**Description**

Toggle bumped track shuffle.

Set this to disabled if you wish to avoid bumped songs being shuffled. This takes priority
over ``[p]shuffle``.

.. _audio-command-sing:

^^^^
sing
^^^^

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]sing 

**Description**

Make Red sing one of her songs.

.. _audio-command-skip:

^^^^
skip
^^^^

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]skip [skip_to_track]

**Description**

Skip to the next track, or to a given track number.

.. _audio-command-stop:

^^^^
stop
^^^^

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]stop 

**Description**

Stop playback and clear the queue.

.. _audio-command-summon:

^^^^^^
summon
^^^^^^

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]summon 

**Description**

Summon the bot to a voice channel.

.. _audio-command-volume:

^^^^^^
volume
^^^^^^

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]volume [vol]

**Description**

Set the volume, 1% - 150%.

.. _llset-commands:

-----------------------
Lavalink Setup Commands
-----------------------

> ``[p]llsetup`` commands are used for advanced management of Lavalink servers. They are
> available dynamically dependent on whether you are managing your Lavalink node internally or externally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``[p]llsetup`` group commands are used for advanced management of the connection to the Lavalink 
server. The subcommands are dynamically available depending on whether Red is managing your 
Lavalink node or if you are connecting to one you manage yourself, or a service that offers Lavalink
nodes.
```

> Commands specifically for internal/managed Lavalink nodes can be found in
> :ref:`this section<internal-node-management-commands>`, whilst commands for external
> Lavalink nodes can be found :ref:`here<external-node-management-commands>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Commands specifically for managed Lavalink nodes can be found in :ref:`this section<managed-node-management-commands>`, 
whilst commands for unmanaged Lavalink nodes can be found :ref:`here<unmanaged-node-management-commands>`
```

^^^^^^^

.. note:: |owner-lock|

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]llsetup 

**Description**

Manage Lavalink node configuration settings. This command holds all commands to
manage an external or managed Lavalink node.

.. warning::

    You should not mess with any command in here unless you have a valid reason to,
    i.e. been told by someone in the Red-Discord Bot support server to do so.
    All the commands in here have the potential to break the Audio cog.

""""""""""""""""
llsetup external
""""""""""""""""

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]llsetup external

**Description**

Toggle using external Lavalink nodes - requires an existing external Lavalink node for
Audio to work, if enabled. This command disables the managed Lavalink server, if you do
not have an external Lavalink node you will be unable to use Audio while this is enabled.

""""""""""""
llsetup info
""""""""""""

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]llsetup info

**Description**

Display Lavalink connection settings.

"""""""""""""
llsetup reset
"""""""""""""

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]llsetup reset

**Description**

Reset all ``[p]llset`` changes back to their default values.

> .. _internal-node-management-commands:
> 
> ---------------------------------
> Internal Node Management Commands
> ---------------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _managed-node-management-commands:

--------------------------------
Managed Node Management Commands
--------------------------------
```

Set the managed Lavalink node maximum heap-size.

By default, this value is 50% of available RAM in the host machine
represented by [1-1024][M|G] (256M, 256G for example).

This value only represents the maximum amount of RAM allowed to be
used at any given point, and does not mean that the managed Lavalink
node will always use this amount of RAM.

**Arguments**

* ``[size]`` - The node's maximum heap-size, defaulting to ``3G``.

.. _audio-command-llsetup-java:

^^^^^^^^^^^^
llsetup java
^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]llsetup java [javapath]

**Description**

Change your Java executable path.

This command shouldn't need to be used most of the time,
and is only useful if the host machine has conflicting Java versions.

If changing this make sure that the java you set is supported by Audio.
The current supported version is Java 11.

**Arguments**

* ``[java]`` - The java executable path, leave blank to reset it back to default.

.. _audio-command-llsetup-yaml:

^^^^^^^^^^^^
llsetup yaml
^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]llsetup yaml

**Description**

Uploads a copy of the application.yml file used by the managed Lavalink node.

> .. _external-node-management-commands:
> 
> ---------------------------------
> External Node Management Commands
> ---------------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _unmanaged-node-management-commands:

----------------------------------
Unmanaged Node Management Commands
----------------------------------
```

command name, like ``[p]help playlist append``.

In this guide, you will see references to "Lavalink" or the "Lavalink.jar". `Lavalink <https://github.com/freyacodes/Lavalink/>`_ is the
Java-based audio backend we use to be able to play music through the bot. Most users will
not have to worry much about Lavalink or what it is, as Audio manages this process for you
by default. Advanced users can read more about Lavalink and special cases under the 
:ref:`Lavalink - Advanced Usage<advanced-usage>` section below.

You will also see references to ``managed`` or ``unmanaged`` in regards to the Lavalink.jar.
The default is ``managed``, as Audio manages the Lavalink.jar in this state. If it is run as an
``unmanaged`` process, this means you as the bot owner will be managing the Lavalink process yourself.

When the Audio cog is first loaded, it will contact GitHub and download the newest Lavalink.jar file
for your bot to use. Any time Red is updated, and you update your bot, most likely it will download a new,
updated Lavalink.jar for your bot. It is important to keep your bot updated as fixes are provided for Lavalink frequently.

> All commands should be used in a Discord server, and not in Direct Messages as Audio is not available there.

Reviewer 3: Maybe put this in a warning block?

* ``[p]skip`` - Skip to the next song in the queue, if there is one.
* ``[p]seek`` - Seek ahead to a specific track time, or seek ahead by seconds.
* ``[p]now`` - Show what song is currently playing.
* ``[p]volume`` - Set the volume from 0% to 150%. 100% is the default. Discord server owners can set a limit to the volume with ``[p]audioset maxvolume``.

.. note::

	The following services are currently supported through ``[p]play``:

	* Bandcamp
	* HTTPS Icecast Streams
	* HTTPS Shoutcast Streams
	* Local file playback (:ref:`see here<local-tracks>`)
	* SoundCloud
	* Spotify links via YouTube (:ref:`see here<spotify-playback-and-api-keys>`)
	* Twitch
	* Vimeo
	* YouTube
	* Other AAC, MP3, or OGG-encoded streams

.. note::

	``[p]audioset restrict`` is a toggle that only allows commercial site (YouTube, Soundcloud, etc) playback by default.
	When toggled off, users will be able to play songs from HTTPS streams or arbitrary sites, but this could be a
	security issue as your bot's IP address will be sent to any site it's connecting to, per standard internet protocol.

.. _faq:

--------------------------

> Frequently Asked Questions

Reviewer 3: Even with indentation, I don't think questions vs answers stand out enough. Maybe bold questions?

--------------------------

Q: I used a playlist link with some of the playlist related commands and it tells me that it can't find it. 
How can I use this playlist link with playlist commands in audio?

	Red Audio uses Red playlists in its commands that take playlist arguments. 
	These playlists can be created and modified using the ``[p]playlist`` group command.
	When a playlist or song(s) are saved as a Red playlist, it is assigned an ID automatically,
	and it is also assigned the one-word name you provided it when creating the playlist.

> 	Either one of these identifiers can be used with playlist-related commands.

Reviewer 3: I would suggest also adding a comment about how a red playlist could be created from an outside playlist, possibly with `[p]playlist save`?

	queue is empty. 
	``[p]audioset emptydisconnect`` with a seconds argument greater than 0 will make the bot 
	auto-disconnect once it's alone in the channel, after the amount of seconds given to the 
	command. This setting takes precedence over ``[p]audioset dc`` if both settings are active.

Q: How do I use localtracks?

	See the :ref:`local tracks section<local-tracks>`.
    
Q: My console is saying that "Port 2333 is already in use". How can I fix this?

    If you are trying to run multiple bots with Audio, you should follow our guide on
    :ref:`setting up Audio for multiple bots<multibots>`. Otherwise, another process is using the 
    port, so you need to figure out what is using port 2333 and terminate/disconnect it yourself.
    
Q: My terminal is saying that I "must install Java 11 for Lavalink to run". How can I fix this?

    You are getting this error because you have a different version of Java installed, or you don't have
    Java installed at all. As the error states, Java 11 is required, and can be installed from
    `here <https://adoptium.net/temurin/releases/?version=11>`__.
    

>     Use ``[p]llset java <path_to_java_11_executable>``, to make Audio launch Lavalink with a
>     specific Java binary. To do this, you will need to locate your ``java.exe``/``java`` file
>     in your **Java 11 install**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    If you have Java 11 installed, and are still getting this error, you will have to manually tell Audio where your Java install is located.
    Use ``[p]llset java <path_to_java_11_executable>``, to make Audio launch Lavalink with a
    specific Java binary. To do this, you will need to locate your ``java.exe``/``java`` file
    in your **Java 11 install**.
```

	If you are on Linux, this process can be automated using systemd, for unmanaged
	Lavalink backends **only**. See :ref:`here<linux-audio-autorestart>` for details.

.. warning::

	By running multiple bots that use Audio, the responsibility for keeping the Lavalink.jar updated will now be
	in your hands, as Red will no longer manage it through the Audio cog. See :ref:`here<obtaining-the-latest-lavalink>` for guidance.

.. _linux-audio-autorestart:

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Linux Lavalink Auto-Restart
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Auto-restarting Lavalink is possible on Linux with systemd, for unmanaged Lavalink backends.

Firstly, find out what your datapath is with the ``[p]datapath`` command. Your Lavalink path is
``<datapath>/cogs/Audio``. Create a file named ``auto_update.sh`` in your Lavalink path.

Inside this newly created file, paste the following text:

.. code-block:: sh

	curl -LOz Lavalink.jar https://github.com/Cog-Creators/Lavalink-Jars/releases/latest/download/Lavalink.jar

Run the following, replacing ``<Lavalink path>`` with the Lavalink path you generated earlier (``<datapath>/cogs/Audio``).

.. code-block:: sh

	chmod a+rx <Lavalink path>/auto_update.sh

> Now we need to create a service file so that systemd can do it's magic. Run the following command:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now we need to create a service file so that systemd can do its magic. Run the following command:
```

	Group=<username>
	ExecStartPre=/bin/bash <Lavalink path>/auto_update.sh # Comment this line out if you did not create the auto_update.sh
	Type=idle
	Restart=always
	RestartSec=15

	[Install]
	WantedBy=multi-user.target

Finally, we need to start and enable the service. Run the following commands, separately.

.. code-block:: sh
	
	sudo systemctl start lavalink
	sudo systemctl enable lavalink

These commands always need to be ran when starting the lavalink service to ensure that the
service runs in the background.

Finally, you can run the following to retrieve logs for the service, when you need them:

.. code-block:: sh
	
	sudo journalctl -u lavalink

.. _obtaining-the-latest-lavalink:

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Obtaining the latest Lavalink.jar on a Red update
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**To manually download the jar**

1. Stop your bot.
2. Click `here <https://github.com/Cog-Creators/Lavalink-Jars/releases/latest>`__.
3. Download the Lavalink.jar file.

**If you are not running your own instance of Lavalink**

1. Stop your bot by running ``[p]shutdown``.
2. Move the Lavalink.jar to your ``<datapath>/cogs/Audio/`` folder.

> 3. Start your bot.

Reviewer 3: If this section were just about manually installing a particular version of lavalink, it'd make sense to have this here. Since it's about obtaining it "after a red update", I think including the steps for managed lavalink doesn't make sense when red will install it for you.

> **If you are running your own instance of Lavalink**

Reviewer 3: This should use the `managed` and `unmanaged` keywords used throughout the rest of the document, for clarity.

1. Stop all instances of Red running on the host.
2. Stop the Lavalink process.
3. Move the Lavalink.jar to where your old Lavalink.jar is located and overwrite the old file.
4. Start up the new Lavalink.jar process via a process manager like systemd, or by running:

   .. code-block:: sh
   
	   java -jar Lavalink.jar -Djdk.tls.client.protocols=TLSv1.2

5. Start up your bots

.. _remote-lavalink:

---------------------------------------------------------------

> Setting up an unmanaged Lavalink node on a remote VPS or server

Reviewer 3: This whole section and `Lavalink - Advanced Usage` cover most of the same points, yet they are separate sections with overlapping content. I think either these sections need to be combined, or one of them needs to point to specific sections in the other. Currently it's confusing me quite a bit, and I'm fairly familiar with how this bot works.

Reviewer 2: It's a tough one - the documentation of running a local unmanaged and a remote unmanaged is mostly the same with a few key differences.

local unmanaged, red would have installed java for you so the docs should tell you to use java 11. 
remote unmanaged is wholly isolated from Red - in this case, Java 13 and 18 should be the goto java versions, the applications YAML will also differ as the local managed the binding IP should be localhost, while a remote unmanaged will be 0.0.0.0 as it will have to communicate over the internet.

IMHO it makes sense and it's clear for a user to have these 2 sections separate - that being said, remote unmanaged is obviously outside the scope of Red docs

Reviewer 3: It was not clear to me that one is talking about exclusively remote hosting, and the other only local hosting. If that's the difference, these sections should make it more clear by making something akin to that be the header of each, rather than just "advanced usage".

---------------------------------------------------------------

.. attention::

    We'd like to thank BreezeQS, as this guide is a supersession of their unofficial bare-bones guide.

This guide explains how to set up an unmanaged Lavalink node on a separate server running Ubuntu 20.04 LTS.
It is assumed your bot currently uses a managed Lavalink server (Red's default). If you run into any
issues, feel free to ask for help in the `Red Support Server <https://discord.gg/red>`__.

.. warning::

    For security purposes DO NOT follow this guide while logged in as the root user. You should create
    a separate non-root user instead. You can follow
    `this guide <https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-create-a-new-sudo-enabled-user-on-ubuntu-20-04-quickstart>`__
    from DigitalOcean if you need help about how this is done.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Prerequisite Installation
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> We will first install Lavalink and lay the foundation for our finished server. There are some prequisites

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We will first install Lavalink and lay the foundation for our finished server. There are some prerequisites
```

Zulu builds are suggested, see `here <https://github.com/freyacodes/Lavalink/#requirements>`__ for more information.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Setting Up The Lavalink Folder
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Lavalink itself, its configuration, and its logs will all be kept in a single directory. In this guide,
we will simply call this directory lavalink and it will be located in the home directory of the user you
are logged in as.

We need to create a new directory called **lavalink**, and then switch to it as the upcoming sections of
this guide require your current directory to be the **lavalink** folder. We can achieve this by running
the following commands one by one:

.. code-block:: sh

    cd
    mkdir lavalink
    cd lavalink

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Installing Lavalink
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Lavalink executable used in Red-Discordbot is slightly modified and is not the same as stock Lavalink,
it ensures proper operation when used with Red-Discordbot and compatibility with systems and libraries that
Red uses to operate. It's required to use this Lavalink jar when running unmanaged Lavalink servers to not

> void your privilege to recieve support. Assuming your current directory is the lavalink folder as you ran

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
void your privilege to receive support. Assuming your current directory is the lavalink folder as you ran
```

the ``cd lavalink`` command in the previous section, you can run the following commands one by one to install it:

.. code-block:: sh

    curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/freyacodes/Lavalink/master/LavalinkServer/application.yml.example > application.yml
    curl -LOz Lavalink.jar https://github.com/Cog-Creators/Lavalink-Jars/releases/latest/download/Lavalink.jar

If you did it properly, the files ``Lavalink.jar`` and ``application.yml`` will show up when we run ``ls``, the Linux command

> to list the contents of current directory.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to list the contents of the current directory.
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Starting Lavalink
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Now that Lavalink has been installed and configured, we can start it up. To do so, run the following command, making sure
that you are inside the lavalink folder, of course:

.. code-block:: sh
    
    java -Djdk.tls.client.protocols=TLSv1.2 -jar Lavalink.jar

On successful start, Lavalink will greet you with a line mentioning that it is ready to accept connections and you can now
try connecting to it with your bot. 

Since we did not configure autostart for Lavalink, you will have to keep the console window open or it will be shut down
and all connections will be dropped. This is similar to how it happens in Red-Discordbot itself.

This also means that you will have to restart Lavalink manually each time you log on. This is often done in testing environments.
You can restart Lavalink manually by running the following commands one by one:

.. code-block:: sh

    cd
    cd lavalink
    java -Djdk.tls.client.protocols=TLSv1.2 -jar Lavalink.jar

You can stop Lavalink and reclaim the console by hitting ``CTRL+C``.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Updating Lavalink
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> With new releases of Red-Discordbot, sometimes new Lavalink jars are also released. Using a obselete version of Lavalink

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With new releases of Red-Discordbot, sometimes new Lavalink jars are also released. Using an obsolete version of Lavalink
```

with newer versions of Red-Discordbot can cause all sorts of problems.

Normally, users do not have to worry about this as when Red-Discordbot is configured to use a managed Lavalink server
(the default setting) Lavalink is automatically updated when a new release comes out.

However, since you are running a Lavalink instance yourself you are responsible for keeping it up to date.
When a new release of Red-Discordbot also requires a update to the Lavalink jar, you will be informed in the changelogs
posted in our documentation.

When a new Lavalink.jar comes out, you can easily update the existing one. First, you should stop Lavalink if it's currently
running. And switch to your lavalink folder. We have discussed how this was done using the ``cd`` command in the previous sections.

Then, you can run the following command to replace your existing Lavalink jar with the new one:

.. code-block:: sh

>     curl -LOz Lavalink.jar https://github.com/Cog-Creators/Lavalink-Jars/releases/latest/download/Lavalink.jar

Reviewer 3: Any reason why this option is here, but not in the "Obtaining the latest Lavalink.jar on a Red update" section? This whole section should probably just direct to that section, it doesn't seem like anything is super different than what's in that section.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If your Red instance and Lavalink server will communicate over the Internet, make sure the Lavalink port is accessible
from the internet. Click `here <https://www.yougetsignal.com/tools/open-ports/>`__ and test if the port you set in the ``application.yml``
is accessible on the public ip address of your Lavalink server. This step isn't necessary if your Lavalink server and Red
instance will communicate over LAN. If you get connectivity errors, make sure there are no firewalls blocking the port and
you are using the correct port.

If successful, run each of the following commands one by one on your bot. Replace ``"yourlavalinkip"`` with the ip of your Lavalink server.
Change ``"port"`` with the port you set up in the application.yml. Change ``"password"`` with the password you set up in the application.yml.
Do not use quotes in these commands. For example, ``[p]llset host 192.168.10.101`` or ``[p]llset password ahyesverysecure``.

.. code-block:: none

    [p]llset external
    [p]llset host "yourlavalinkip"
    [p]llset port "port"
    [p]llset password "password"

Reload audio with ``[p]reload audio`` and give it a few seconds to connect.

> You now (hopefully) have a functioning Lavalink server on a machine seperate to the one running your Red instance. Good luck!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You now (hopefully) have a functioning Lavalink server on a machine separate to the one running your Red instance. Good luck!
```

""""""""""""""""""""""""""

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]audioset autoplay playlist <playlist_name_OR_id> [args]

**Description**

Set a playlist to auto-play songs from.

**Args**

The following are all optional:

* --scope <scope>
* --author [user]
* --guild [guild] (**only the bot owner can use this**)

**Scope** is one of the following:

* Global
* Guild
* User

**Author** can be one of the following:

* User ID
* User Mention
* User Name#123

**Guild** can be one of the following:

* Guild ID
* Exact guild name

**Example Usage**

* ``[p]audioset autoplay MyGuildPlaylist``
* ``[p]audioset autoplay MyGlobalPlaylist --scope Global``
* ``[p]audioset autoplay PersonalPlaylist --scope User --author Draper``

.. _audio-command-audioset-autoplay-reset:

"""""""""""""""""""""""
audioset autoplay reset
"""""""""""""""""""""""

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]audioset autoplay reset 

**Description**

Resets auto-play to the default playlist.

.. _audio-command-audioset-autoplay-toggle:

""""""""""""""""""""""""
audioset autoplay toggle
""""""""""""""""""""""""

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]audioset autoplay toggle 

**Description**

> Toggle auto-play when there no songs in queue.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Toggle auto-play when there are no songs in the queue.
```
```suggestion
Toggle automatically enabling auto-play when there are no songs in the queue.
```
This might also need to be changed in the actual docstring. I think the second is better, since it is more exact to what this does, but the first is acceptable as well.

Toggle daily queues. Daily queues creates a playlist for all tracks played today.

.. _audio-command-audioset-dc:

"""""""""""
audioset dc
"""""""""""

.. note:: |mod-lock|

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]audioset dc 

**Description**

Toggle the bot auto-disconnecting when done playing. This setting takes precedence
over ``[p]audioset emptydisconnect``.

.. _audio-command-audioset-dj:

"""""""""""
audioset dj
"""""""""""

.. note:: |admin-lock|

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]audioset dj 

**Description**

Toggle DJ mode. DJ mode allows users with the DJ role to use audio commands.

.. _audio-command-audioset-emptydisconnect:

""""""""""""""""""""""""
audioset emptydisconnect
""""""""""""""""""""""""

.. note:: |mod-lock|

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]audioset emptydisconnect <seconds>

**Description**

Auto-disconnect from channel when bot is alone in it for x seconds, 0 to disable.
``[p]audioset dc`` takes precedence over this setting.

.. _audio-command-audioset-emptypause:

"""""""""""""""""""
audioset emptypause
"""""""""""""""""""

.. note:: |mod-lock|

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]audioset emptypause <seconds>

**Description**

> Auto-pause after x seconds when room is empty, 0 to disable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Auto-pause after x seconds when the channel is empty, 0 to disable.
```

command name, like ``[p]help playlist append``.

In this guide, you will see references to "Lavalink" or the "Lavalink.jar". `Lavalink <https://github.com/freyacodes/Lavalink/>`_ is the
Java-based audio backend we use to be able to play music through the bot. Most users will
not have to worry much about Lavalink or what it is, as Audio manages this process for you
by default. Advanced users can read more about Lavalink and special cases under the 
:ref:`Lavalink - Advanced Usage<advanced-usage>` section below.

You will also see references to ``managed`` or ``unmanaged`` in regards to the Lavalink.jar.
The default is ``managed``, as Audio manages the Lavalink.jar in this state. If it is run as an
``unmanaged`` process, this means you as the bot owner will be managing the Lavalink process yourself.

When the Audio cog is first loaded, it will contact GitHub and download the newest Lavalink.jar file
for your bot to use. Any time Red is updated, and you update your bot, most likely it will download a new,
updated Lavalink.jar for your bot. It is important to keep your bot updated as fixes are provided for Lavalink frequently.

> All commands should be used in a Discord server, and not in Direct Messages as Audio is not available there.

Reviewer 4: Discord server - as opposed to another kind of server?

Reviewer 2: The docs reference other server type so it makes sense reintroducing the discord context here

.. _basic-audio-use:

----------------
Basic Audio Use
----------------

The following commands are used for controlling the audio being played, such as starting, stopping, and altering volume.

* ``[p]play`` - Play a single song or a playlist URL or use this command with words to search for a song.
* ``[p]search`` - Search for a track on YouTube. Searching on Soundcloud can be done with ``[p]search sc`` and the keywords to search for.
* ``[p]stop`` - Stops playback and clears the queue.
* ``[p]pause`` - This is a toggle. Use ``[p]pause`` again to resume the music.
* ``[p]prev`` - Stops playback of the current song and returns to the start of the previous song played.
* ``[p]skip`` - Skip to the next song in the queue, if there is one.
* ``[p]seek`` - Seek ahead to a specific track time, or seek ahead by seconds.
* ``[p]now`` - Show what song is currently playing.

> * ``[p]volume`` - Set the volume from 0 to 150. 100 is the default. Discord server owners can set a limit to the volume with ``[p]audioset maxvolume``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``[p]volume`` - Set the volume from 0% to 150%. 100% is the default. Discord server owners can set a limit to the volume with ``[p]audioset maxvolume``.
```

* .mk3d
* .mka
* .mks

The following files are **NOT** supported:

* .mid
* .mka
* .amr
* .aiff
* .ac3
* .voc
* .dsf
* .vob
* .mts
* .avi
* .mpg
* .mpeg
* .swf

.. _dj-role-and-voteskip:

--------------------
DJ Role and Voteskip
--------------------

Audio has an internal permissions system for restrictions to audio commands while other people are listening to
music with the bot. Bot owners, server admins and mods bypass these restrictions when they are in use.

``[p]audioset dj`` will turn on the DJ role restriction system, ``[p]audioset role`` will let you choose or
reassign the DJ role, and if you wish to make non-privileged users vote to skip songs, voteskip can be enabled
with ``[p]audioset vote``.

If a non-privileged user is listening to music alone in the channel, they can use commands without restrictions,
even if DJ role or voteskip settings are active.

.. _sound-quality-issues:

--------------------
Sound Quality Issues
--------------------

Laggy audio is most likely caused by:

* A problem with the connection between the machine that is hosting Lavalink and the Discord voice server.
* Issues with Discord.

You can try the following to resolve poor sound quality:

> * Don't host on home internet, especially over a WiFi connection, try hosting your bot elsewhere.

Reviewer 4: nitpick - could be rephrased to use less awkward commas

* Try the web browser instead of the desktop client for listening.
* Simply wait, as audio quality may improve in due course.
* Restart your bot.
* Check to make sure it's not just a bad quality song (try a different song).
* Try to listen on a different Discord server or server region.
* If not everyone is experiencing the issue, it's a Discord client issue.

.. _no-sound:

^^^^^^^^
No Sound
^^^^^^^^

If the bot's speaking light is active, but there is no sound, troubleshoot the following:

1. Is the bot's user volume turned up? (right click on the bot in discord, see the slider).

> 2. Is the bot muted or deafened? Are you deafened? Are you deaf?

Reviewer 4: no issues here but this is very funny

2. Try to reload the audio cog with ``[p]audioset restart``.
3. Make sure the firewall on the host is configured properly.

.. _advanced-usage:

-------------------------
Lavalink - Advanced Usage
-------------------------

.. _multibots:

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Setting up Multiple Red Instances with Audio
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you are wanting to use multiple bots with Audio on the same machine, you'll need to make a few
necessary modifications.

Firstly, stop all Red bots. For each bot using Audio:

1. Start the bot.
2. Run the command ``[p]llset external``.
3. Stop the bot.

Next, open a command prompt/terminal window. Navigate to ``<datapath>/cogs/Audio`` for any of your bot
instances - it doesn't matter which bot as all your bots will now use this single instance of Lavalink.
You can find your ``<datapath>`` with the ``[p]datapath`` command.

Now you need to determine your RAM needs. If your bot has 1GB RAM available, Lavalink should be restricted 
to perhaps 384MB -> 768MB, depending on the cogs you have installed. If your bot has 2GB of RAM available, 
a good amount may be 512MB -> 1GB. 

> Run the following command, where ``Xmx`` specifies the RAM values you have just determined. The MB suffix 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the following command, where ``Xmx`` specifies the RAM value you have just determined. The MB suffix 
```

is M and the GB suffix is G.

.. code-block:: ini

	java -jar -Xmx768M Lavalink.jar -Djdk.tls.client.protocols=TLSv1.2

Leave this command prompt/terminal window open (you will need to do this every time you want to start Lavalink
for your bots). Once Lavalink says it has fully started, you can start your bots back up.

.. note::

	If you are on Linux, this process can be automated using systemd, for unmanaged
	Lavalink backends **only**. See :ref:`here<linux-audio-autorestart>` for details.

.. warning::

> 	By running multiple bots on Audio, the responsibility for keeping the Lavalink.jar updated will now be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	By running multiple bots that use Audio, the responsibility for keeping the Lavalink.jar updated will now be
```

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Obtaining the latest Lavalink.jar on a Red update
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**To manually download the jar**

1. Stop your bot.
2. Click `here <https://github.com/Cog-Creators/Lavalink-Jars/releases/latest>`__.
3. Download the Lavalink.jar file.

**If you are not running your own instance of Lavalink**

1. Stop your bot by running ``[p]shutdown``.
2. Move the Lavalink.jar to your ``<datapath>/cogs/Audio/`` folder.
3. Start your bot.

**If you are running your own instance of Lavalink**

1. Stop all instances of Red running on the host.
2. Stop the Lavalink process.
3. Move the Lavalink.jar to where your old Lavalink.jar is located and overwrite the old file.
4. Start up the new Lavalink.jar process via a process manager like systemd, or by running:

   .. code-block:: sh
   
	   java -jar Lavalink.jar -Djdk.tls.client.protocols=TLSv1.2

5. Start up your bots

.. _remote-lavalink:

---------------------------------------------------------------
Setting up an unmanaged Lavalink node on a remote VPS or server
---------------------------------------------------------------

.. attention::

>     Changes have been made to this guide since, but it is with thanks

Reviewer 4: This thanks is awkwardly written. Suggestion:

We'd like to thank BreezeQS, as this guide is based off their unofficial bare-bones guide.

Author: > This thanks is awkwardly written. Suggestion: We'd like to thank BreezeQS, as this guide is based off their unofficial bare-bones guide.

I don't like how "guide" is repeated in your suggestion. How about "We'd like to thank BreezeQS, as this guide is a supersession of their unofficial bare-bones guide."?

If you did it properly, the files ``Lavalink.jar`` and ``application.yml`` will show up when we run ``ls``, the Linux command
to list the contents of current directory.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Configuring Lavalink
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Lavalink stores its settings inside the ``application.yml`` file located in the same directory as the executable jar itself.
You have to edit this file and change some settings for security purposes.

First, let's open the file. You can use any text editor you want, but in this guide we will use nano.
Run the following command:

.. code-block:: sh
    
    nano application.yml

You will be dropped into the nano text editor with ``application.yml`` opened. The two important fields that we will modify
are the ``port`` and ``password`` fields.

The ``port`` field is the TCP port your Lavalink server will be accessible at. The default value is 2333, and you can set this
to any positive integer smaller than 65535 and greater than 1000. It is advised to change it to aid in security.

The ``password`` field is the password that will be required for accessing your Lavalink server and by default the password is

> ``youshallnotpass``. You should absolutely change this to a secure password.

Reviewer 4: lol how many people actually will though

> Those two fields are important and you should note the new values you entered in them somewhere you will not forget as

Reviewer 4: Awkward wording

.. _audio:

=====
Audio
=====

This is the cog guide for the audio cog. You will
find detailed docs about usage and commands.

``[p]`` is considered as your prefix.

.. note:: To use this cog, load it by typing this::

    	[p]load audio

You can see additional help for any command in this guide by using ``[p]help`` with the
command name, like ``[p]help playlist append``.

In this guide, you will see references to "Lavalink" or the "Lavalink.jar". `Lavalink <https://github.com/freyacodes/Lavalink/>`_ is the
Java-based audio backend we use to be able to play music through the bot. Most users will
not have to worry much about Lavalink or what it is, as Audio manages this process for you
by default. Advanced users can read more about Lavalink and special cases under the 

> :ref:`Lavalink - Advanced Usage<advanced-usage>` section below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:ref:`Lavalink - Red Community-Supported Advanced Usage<advanced-usage>` section below.
```

* Restart your bot.
* Check to make sure it's not just a bad quality song (try a different song).
* Try to listen on a different Discord server or server region.
* If not everyone is experiencing the issue, it's a Discord client issue.

.. _no-sound:

^^^^^^^^
No Sound
^^^^^^^^

If the bot's speaking light is active, but there is no sound, troubleshoot the following:

1. Is the bot's user volume turned up? (right click on the bot in discord, see the slider).
2. Is the bot muted or deafened? Are you deafened? Are you deaf?
3. Check Discord audio device settings and volume (cog icon next to your username in the bottom left, click "Voice and Video").
4. Try dragging and dropping the bot back to the voice channel.
5. Check system audio device settings and volume.
6. Ask another member to come into the voice channel to confirm that it's not just you.

If the track progress is stuck on 00:00 when you run ``[p]now``:

1. Try to run ``[p]disconnect`` and replay the song.
2. Try to reload the audio cog with ``[p]audioset restart``.
3. Make sure the firewall on the host is configured properly.

.. _advanced-usage:

-------------------------

> Lavalink - Advanced Usage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lavalink - Red Community-Supported Advanced Usage
```

-------------------------

.. _multibots:

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Setting up Multiple Red Instances with Audio

> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Setting up Multiple Red Instances with Audio on the Same Host
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

.. warning::

    This section provides instructions for setting up an unmanaged Lavalink node that is on the same machine 
    as the Red bot(s) that need to connect to it. This configuration is supported by the Red community, so 
    if you need additional help, feel free to join the `Red Support Server <https://discord.gg/red>`__ and ask in the #support channel.

    If you are looking to set up a remote, unmanaged Lavalink node on a different vps or host than the Red 
    bot(s) that will connect to it, we provide basic instructions in this guide :ref:`here<remote-lavalink>`, but that 
    configuration is partially unsupported as we do not provide help with network configuration or system 
    administration. You will be responsible for configuring your network, firewall, and other system 
    properties to enable playback and for the bot to connect to the remote unmanaged Lavalink server.

```

	[Service]
	ExecStart=<Java executable path> -Djdk.tls.client.protocols=TLSv1.2 -jar < Lavalink path >/Lavalink.jar
	WorkingDirectory=<Lavalink path>
	User=<username>
	Group=<username>
	ExecStartPre=/bin/bash <Lavalink path>/auto_update.sh # Comment this line out if you did not create the auto_update.sh
	Type=idle
	Restart=always
	RestartSec=15

	[Install]
	WantedBy=multi-user.target

Finally, we need to start and enable the service. Run the following commands, separately.

.. code-block:: sh
	
	sudo systemctl start lavalink
	sudo systemctl enable lavalink

These commands always need to be ran when starting the lavalink service to ensure that the
service runs in the background.

Finally, you can run the following to retrieve logs for the service, when you need them:

.. code-block:: sh
	
	sudo journalctl -u lavalink

.. _obtaining-the-latest-lavalink:

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Obtaining the latest Lavalink.jar on a Red update
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**To manually download the jar**

1. Stop your bot.
2. Click `here <https://github.com/Cog-Creators/Lavalink-Jars/releases/latest>`__.
3. Download the Lavalink.jar file.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Alternatively, the Lavalink.jar can be downloaded by using the command:

.. code-block:: sh

    curl -LOz Lavalink.jar https://github.com/Cog-Creators/Lavalink-Jars/releases/latest/download/Lavalink.jar

```

> **If you are running a managed instance of Lavalink**
> 
> 1. Stop your bot by running ``[p]shutdown``.
> 2. Move the Lavalink.jar to your ``<datapath>/cogs/Audio/`` folder.
> 3. Start your bot.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> **If you are running an unmanaged instance of Lavalink**
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

1. Stop all instances of Red running on the host.
2. Stop the Lavalink process.
3. Move the Lavalink.jar to where your old Lavalink.jar is located and overwrite the old file.
4. Start up the new Lavalink.jar process via a process manager like systemd, or by running:

   .. code-block:: sh
   
	   java -jar Lavalink.jar -Djdk.tls.client.protocols=TLSv1.2

5. Start up your bots

.. _remote-lavalink:

---------------------------------------------------------------
Setting up an unmanaged Lavalink node on a remote VPS or server
---------------------------------------------------------------

.. attention::

    We'd like to thank BreezeQS, as this guide is a supersession of their unofficial bare-bones guide.

This guide explains how to set up an unmanaged Lavalink node on a separate server running Ubuntu 20.04 LTS.
It is assumed your bot currently uses a managed Lavalink server (Red's default). If you run into any
issues, feel free to ask for help in the `Red Support Server <https://discord.gg/red>`__.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is assumed your bot currently uses a managed Lavalink server (Red's default). 

.. warning::

    This guide is provided for advice on this topic and this is generally not a supported configuration for 
    Red's usage of Lavalink, as it involves system administration and network configuration. However, if you
    run into any issues, feel free to ask for help in the `Red Support Server <https://discord.gg/red>`__, in the #general channel.

```

.. code-block:: sh

    sudo apt install openjdk-11-jre-headless -y

Otherwise, Lavalink works well with most versions of Java 11, 13, 15, 16, 17, and 18. Azul 
Zulu builds are suggested, see `here <https://github.com/freyacodes/Lavalink/#requirements>`__ for more information.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Setting Up The Lavalink Folder
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Lavalink itself, its configuration, and its logs will all be kept in a single directory. In this guide,
we will simply call this directory lavalink and it will be located in the home directory of the user you
are logged in as.

We need to create a new directory called **lavalink**, and then switch to it as the upcoming sections of
this guide require your current directory to be the **lavalink** folder. We can achieve this by running
the following commands one by one:

.. code-block:: sh

    cd
    mkdir lavalink
    cd lavalink

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Installing Lavalink
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Lavalink executable used in Red-Discordbot is slightly modified and is not the same as stock Lavalink,
it ensures proper operation when used with Red-Discordbot and compatibility with systems and libraries that

> Red uses to operate. It's required to use this Lavalink jar when running unmanaged Lavalink servers to not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Red uses to operate. It's required to use this Lavalink.jar when running unmanaged Lavalink servers to not
```

You can restart Lavalink manually by running the following commands one by one:

.. code-block:: sh

    cd
    cd lavalink
    java -Djdk.tls.client.protocols=TLSv1.2 -jar Lavalink.jar

You can stop Lavalink and reclaim the console by hitting ``CTRL+C``.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Updating Lavalink
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

With new releases of Red-Discordbot, sometimes new Lavalink jars are also released. Using an obsolete version of Lavalink
with newer versions of Red-Discordbot can cause all sorts of problems.

Normally, users do not have to worry about this as when Red-Discordbot is configured to use a managed Lavalink server
(the default setting) Lavalink is automatically updated when a new release comes out.

However, since you are running a Lavalink instance yourself you are responsible for keeping it up to date.
When a new release of Red-Discordbot also requires a update to the Lavalink jar, you will be informed in the changelogs
posted in our documentation.

When a new Lavalink.jar comes out, you can easily update the existing one. First, you should stop Lavalink if it's currently

> running. And switch to your lavalink folder. We have discussed how this was done using the ``cd`` command in the previous sections.
> 
> Then, you can run the following command to replace your existing Lavalink jar with the new one:
> 
> .. code-block:: sh
> 
>     curl -LOz Lavalink.jar https://github.com/Cog-Creators/Lavalink-Jars/releases/latest/download/Lavalink.jar

Reviewer: ```suggestion
running. Once you have done this, you can follow the instructions on how to :ref:`obtain the latest Lavalink.jar on a Red update<obtaining-the-latest-lavalink>`.
```

.. _audio:

=====
Audio
=====

This is the cog guide for the audio cog. You will
find detailed docs about usage and commands.

``[p]`` is considered as your prefix.

> .. note:: To use this cog, load it by typing this::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note:: To use this cog for the first time, load it by typing::
```

    	[p]load audio

You can see additional help for any command in this guide by using ``[p]help`` with the
command name, like ``[p]help playlist append``.

In this guide, you will see references to "Lavalink" or the "Lavalink.jar". `Lavalink <https://github.com/freyacodes/Lavalink/>`_ is the
Java-based audio backend we use to be able to play music through the bot. Most users will
not have to worry much about Lavalink or what it is, as Audio manages this process for you
by default. Advanced users can read more about Lavalink and special cases under the 
:ref:`Lavalink - Red Community-Supported Advanced Usage<advanced-usage>` section below.

You will also see references to ``managed`` or ``unmanaged`` in regards to the Lavalink.jar.
The default is ``managed``, as Audio manages the Lavalink.jar in this state. If it is run as an
``unmanaged`` process, this means you as the bot owner will be managing the Lavalink process yourself.

When the Audio cog is first loaded, it will contact GitHub and download the newest Lavalink.jar file

> for your bot to use. Any time Red is updated, and you update your bot, most likely it will download a new,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for your bot to use. Any time Red is updated and you update your bot, it will probably download a new,
```

* ``[p]volume`` - Set the volume from 0% to 150%. 100% is the default. Discord server owners can set a limit to the volume with ``[p]audioset maxvolume``.

.. note::

	The following services are currently supported through ``[p]play``:

	* Bandcamp
	* HTTPS Icecast Streams
	* HTTPS Shoutcast Streams
	* Local file playback (:ref:`see here<local-tracks>`)
	* SoundCloud
	* Spotify links via YouTube (:ref:`see here<spotify-playback-and-api-keys>`)
	* Twitch
	* Vimeo
	* YouTube
	* Other AAC, MP3, or OGG-encoded streams

.. note::

	``[p]audioset restrict`` is a toggle that only allows commercial site (YouTube, Soundcloud, etc) playback by default.
	When toggled off, users will be able to play songs from HTTPS streams or arbitrary sites, but this could be a
	security issue as your bot's IP address will be sent to any site it's connecting to, per standard internet protocol.

.. _faq:

--------------------------
Frequently Asked Questions
--------------------------

**Q: I used a playlist link with some of the playlist related commands and it tells me that it can't find it. 
How can I use this playlist link with playlist commands in audio?**

> 	Red Audio uses Red playlists in its commands that take playlist arguments. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	Audio uses Red playlists in its commands that take playlist arguments. 
```

	These playlists can be created and modified using the ``[p]playlist`` group command.
	When a playlist or song(s) are saved as a Red playlist, it is assigned an ID automatically,
	and it is also assigned the one-word name you provided it when creating the playlist.
	Either one of these identifiers can be used with playlist-related commands.

    .. tip::

        If you have a playlist URL, use ``[p]playlist save <url>`` to save it as a Playlist

>         with Red Audio.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        with Audio.
```

Queue Related Commands
----------------------

* ``[p]queue`` - Shows the queue of playing songs and current settings for the server for shuffle and repeat.
* ``[p]remove`` - Remove a song from the queue. This command uses the track position in the queue for identification, e.g. ``[p]remove 10`` will remove
  the 10th song in the queue.
* ``[p]shuffle`` - Toggle random song playback from the queue.
* ``[p]queue shuffle`` - Shuffles the queue.
* ``[p]repeat`` - Toggle adding songs back into the queue when they are finished playing.
* ``[p]playlist queue`` - Save the current queue to a Red playlist.
* ``[p]audioset persistqueue`` - Can be used to reinstate existing queues when the bot is restarted. This is an owner-only command.
* ``[p]audioset globaldailyqueue`` - Will toggle saving the day's worth of tracks to a Global-level Red playlist, for every day. This is an owner-only command.

.. _playlist_commands:

-----------------
Playlist Commands
-----------------

Playlists can be saved locally on the bot in a variety of different scopes:

* Global - The playlist will be available on all servers.
* Guild (default scope) - The playlist will be available only in a specified guild.

> * User - The playlist will be available for a specified user in any guild in which they share the bot with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* User - The playlist will be available in any guild that the user shares with the bot.
```

* ``[p]playlist list`` - List saved playlists.
* ``[p]playlist queue`` - Save the currently playing queue to a playlist.
* ``[p]playlist remove`` - Remove a track from a playlist by URL.

As always, you can run ``[p]help playlist <command>`` for more information.

.. _owner-audioset-commands:

----------------------------
Owner-Only Audioset Commands
----------------------------

* ``[p]audioset cache`` - This sets the local metadata caching level for Audio. By default, this is set to on as it helps
  reduce 429 Forbidden errors from song services, and also caches Spotify song lookups. Most users will not need to touch this option.
* ``[p]audioset cacheage`` - How long the entries in the cache last. By default, song metadata is cached for 365 days (1 year).
* ``[p]audioset status`` - Show the now playing song in the bot's status, or show how many servers the bot is playing music on, if more than one.
* ``[p]audioset restrictions global`` - Manage the keyword blocklist/allowlist for the whole bot.

.. _guild-audioset-commands:

-----------------------------
Guild-based Audioset Commands
-----------------------------

> * ``[p]audioset notify`` - Toggle extra messages, like a notification message when a track starts, showing the song title, artist, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``[p]audioset notify`` - Toggle extra messages: Audio will display a notification message when a track starts, 
showing the song title, artist, and the thumbnail (if enabled and present). This notify message follows the last 
invoking Audio command - if an Audio command is used in one channel and this setting is on, the notify messages 
will start to appear in the channel where the command was used. If another Audio command is used in another 
channel, notify messages will start appearing in the second channel instead of the first command channel.
```

* ``[p]audioset maxvolume`` - Set the max volume for the guild.
* ``[p]audioset autodeafen`` - Toggle the bot being auto-deafened upon voice channel join.
* ``[p]audioset restrictions`` - Manage the keyword blocklist/allowlist for the guild.
* ``[p]audioset lyrics`` - Searching for tracks will prefer songs with 'lyrics' in the name, to avoid videos with long story intros or outros.

.. _spotify-playback-and-api-keys:

------------------------------
Spotify Playback and API Keys
------------------------------

We will never be able to play directly from Spotify itself as it is against their Terms of Service. Audio can play 
single tracks or playlists from Spotify by looking up the song(s) on YouTube and playing those tracks instead.
This is possible by providing your bot with a YouTube API key and a Spotify API key. Instructions for setting both 
can be found under ``[p]audioset youtubeapi`` and ``[p]audioset spotifyapi``.

> The YouTube API keys that are being given out these days only have 10000 units of quota per day, which is equivalent to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The YouTube API keys that are being given out currently only have 10000 units of quota per day, which is equivalent to
```

100 Spotify song lookups. There is a local metadata cache that Audio uses to be able to retain information about song

> lookups, though. For example, with a 500 song Spotify playlist, the bot will be able to fetch the first 100 songs the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
lookups. For example, with a 500 song Spotify playlist, the bot will be able to fetch the first 100 songs the
```

first day the Spotify playlist URL is used with Audio, then the next day it will be able to use the first 100 lookups
from the local cache, and use the API credits to look up the next 100 songs. After 5 days of playing the Spotify playlist
through Audio, that playlist will be fully cached locally until the cached entries are set to expire and will not require  
any API credits to play songs.

The following commands are relevant:

* ``[p]genre`` - Lets users pick a Spotify music genre to queue music from.
* ``[p]audioset countrycode`` - Lets guild owners specify what country code to prefer for Spotify searches, for the guild.
* ``[p]audioset mycountrycode`` - Lets individual users pick what country code to prefer for Spotify searches of their own.

.. _local-tracks:

------------
Local Tracks
------------

Audio can play music from a ``localtracks`` folder on the device where the bot is hosted. This feature is only available
if your bot and your Lavalink.jar are on the same host, which is the default setup.

To use this feature:

1. Create a "localtracks" folder anywhere where Lavalink/your bot user has permissions to access, on the system.

> 2. Use ``[p]audioset localpath <localtracks path>`` command to set the folder created above as local tracks folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Use ``[p]audioset localpath <localtracks path>`` to set the folder created above as the localtracks folder.
```

3. Create/move/copy/symlink your album folders (Subfolders containing your tracks) to the folder created in Step 1.
4. Put any of Audio's supported files in the following folders:

   * ``localtracks/<parent folder>/song.mp3``
   * ``localtracks/<parent folder>/<child folder>/song.mp3``

When using this localtracks feature, use ``[p]local`` commands. Use ``[p]play <parent folder>/song.mp3`` to play
single songs. Use ``[p]local folder <parent folder>/<child folder>`` to play the entire folder.

The following formats are supported:

* MP3
* FLAC

> * WAV

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

with ``[p]audioset vote``.

If a non-privileged user is listening to music alone in the channel, they can use commands without restrictions,
even if DJ role or voteskip settings are active.

.. _sound-quality-issues:

--------------------
Sound Quality Issues
--------------------

Laggy audio is most likely caused by:

* A problem with the connection between the machine that is hosting Lavalink and the Discord voice server.
* Issues with Discord.

You can try the following to resolve poor sound quality:

* Don't host on home internet, especially over a WiFi connection. Try hosting your bot elsewhere.
* Try the web browser instead of the desktop client for listening.
* Simply wait, as audio quality may improve in due course.
* Restart your bot.
* Check to make sure it's not just a bad quality song (try a different song).
* Try to listen on a different Discord server or server region.
* If not everyone is experiencing the issue, it's a Discord client issue.

.. _no-sound:

^^^^^^^^
No Sound
^^^^^^^^

If the bot's speaking light is active, but there is no sound, troubleshoot the following:

> 1. Is the bot's user volume turned up? (right click on the bot in discord, see the slider).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Is the bot's user volume turned up? (right click on the bot in Discord, see the slider).
```

    ExecStart=< Java executable path > -Djdk.tls.client.protocols=TLSv1.2 -jar < Lavalink path >/Lavalink.jar
    WorkingDirectory=< Lavalink path >
    User=< username >
    Group=< username >
    ExecStartPre=/bin/bash < Lavalink path >/auto_update.sh # Comment this line out if you did not create the auto_update.sh
    Type=idle
    Restart=always
    RestartSec=15

    [Install]
    WantedBy=multi-user.target

* Replace all occurrences of ``< Lavalink path >`` with the output of ``pwd`` you noted earlier.
* Replace all occurrences of ``< Java executable path >`` with the output of ``which java`` you noted earlier.
* Replace all occurrences of ``< username >`` with the output of echo ``"$USER"`` you noted earlier.

Hit ``CTRL+X``, ``y`` and then ENTER to save and exit. We have now registered Lavalink as a service.

""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""
Starting and Enabling the Lavalink Service
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

Now run the following command to start the Lavalink service and wait for 10-15 seconds: 

.. code-block:: sh
    
    sudo systemctl start lavalink

You can check the service status with the following command:

.. code-block:: sh
    

>     sudo journalctl -u lavalink.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    sudo journalctl -u lavalink
```

    [p]sing 

**Description**

Make Red sing one of her songs.

.. _audio-command-skip:

^^^^
skip
^^^^

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]skip [skip_to_track]

**Description**

Skip to the next track, or to a given track number.

.. _audio-command-stop:

^^^^
stop
^^^^

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]stop 

**Description**

Stop playback and clear the queue.

.. _audio-command-summon:

^^^^^^
summon
^^^^^^

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]summon 

**Description**

Summon the bot to a voice channel.

.. _audio-command-volume:

^^^^^^
volume
^^^^^^

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]volume [vol]

**Description**

Set the volume, 1% - 150%.

.. _llset-commands:

-----------------------
Lavalink Setup Commands
-----------------------

``[p]llsetup`` group commands are used for advanced management of the connection to the Lavalink 
server. The subcommands are dynamically available depending on whether Red is managing your 
Lavalink node or if you are connecting to one you manage yourself, or a service that offers Lavalink
nodes.

Commands specifically for managed Lavalink nodes can be found in :ref:`this section<managed-node-management-commands>`, 

> whilst commands for unmanaged Lavalink nodes can be found :ref:`here<unmanaged-node-management-commands>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
whilst commands for unmanaged Lavalink nodes can be found :ref:`here<unmanaged-node-management-commands>`.
```

.. _audio-command-llsetup:

^^^^^^^
llsetup
^^^^^^^

.. note:: |owner-lock|

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]llsetup 

**Description**

> Manage Lavalink node configuration settings. This command holds all commands to
> manage an external or managed Lavalink node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Manage Lavalink node configuration settings. This command holds all commands to
manage an unmanaged (external) or managed Lavalink node.
```

.. warning::

>     You should not mess with any command in here unless you have a valid reason to,
>     i.e. been told by someone in the Red-Discord Bot support server to do so.
>     All the commands in here have the potential to break the Audio cog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    You should not change any command settings in this group command unless you 
    have a valid reason to, e.g. been told by someone in the Red-Discord Bot support 
    server to do so. Changing llsetup command settings have the potential to break 
    Audio cog connection and playback if the wrong settings are used.
```

""""""""""""""""
llsetup external
""""""""""""""""

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]llsetup external

**Description**

Toggle using external Lavalink nodes - requires an existing external Lavalink node for

> Audio to work, if enabled. This command disables the managed Lavalink server, if you do

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Audio to work, if enabled. This command disables the managed Lavalink server: if you do
```

**Description**

Set the managed Lavalink node's binding IP address.

**Arguments**

* ``[host]``: The node's binding IP address, defaulting to "localhost".

.. _audio-command-llsetup-config-port:

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
llsetup config port
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]llsetup config port [port=2333]

**Description**

Set the managed Lavalink node's connection port.

This port is the port the managed Lavalink node binds to, you should
only change this if there is a conflict with the default port because
you already have an application using port 2333 on this device.

**Arguments**

* ``[port]``: The node's connection port, defaulting to 2333.

.. _audio-command-llsetup-config-server:

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
llsetup config server
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]llsetup config server

**Description**

Configure the managed node authorization and connection settings.

.. _audio-command-llsetup-config-server-buffer:

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
llsetup config server buffer
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]llsetup config server buffer [milliseconds=400]

**Description**

> Set the managed Lavalink node NAS buffer size. Only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set the managed Lavalink node JDA-NAS buffer size. Only
```

> Set the managed Lavalink node NAS buffer size. Only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set the managed Lavalink node JDA-NAS buffer size. Only
```

This is the password required for Audio to connect to the managed Lavalink node.
The value by default is ``youshallnotpass``.

**Arguments**

* ``[password]`` - The node's connection password, defaulting to ``youshallnotpass``.

.. _audio-command-llsetup-heapsize:

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
llsetup heapsize
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]llsetup heapsize [size=3G]

**Description**

Set the managed Lavalink node maximum heap-size.

By default, this value is 50% of available RAM in the host machine
represented by [1-1024][M|G] (256M, 256G for example).

This value only represents the maximum amount of RAM allowed to be
used at any given point, and does not mean that the managed Lavalink
node will always use this amount of RAM.

**Arguments**

* ``[size]`` - The node's maximum heap-size, defaulting to ``3G``.

.. _audio-command-llsetup-java:

^^^^^^^^^^^^
llsetup java
^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]llsetup java [javapath]

**Description**

Change your Java executable path.

This command shouldn't need to be used most of the time,
and is only useful if the host machine has conflicting Java versions.

> If changing this make sure that the java you set is supported by Audio.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If changing this make sure that the Java executable you set is supported by Audio.
```

**Description**

Set the Lavalink node host. This command sets the connection host which
Audio will use to connect to an external Lavalink node.

**Arguments**

* ``[host]`` - The connection host, defaulting to "localhost".

.. _audio-command-llsetup-password:

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
llsetup password
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]llsetup password [password=youshallnotpass]

**Description**

Set the Lavalink node password. This command sets the connection password which
Audio will use to connect to an external Lavalink node.

**Arguments**

* ``[password]`` - The connection password, defaulting to "youshallnotpass".

.. _audio-command-llsetup-port:

^^^^^^^^^^^^
llsetup port
^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]llsetup port [port=2333]

**Description**

Set the Lavalink node port. This command sets the connection port which
Audio will use to connect to an external Lavalink node.

**Arguments**

* ``[password]`` - The connection password, defaulting to 2333.

.. _audio-command-llsetup-secured:

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
llsetup secured
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

**Syntax**

.. code-block:: none

    [p]llsetup secured

**Description**

> Set the Lavalink node connection to secured. This command sets the connection type
> to secured when connecting to an external Lavalink node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set the Lavalink node connection to secured. This toggle sets the connection type
to secured or unsecured when connecting to an external Lavalink node.
```
